Question and clarification, as you always know,
that will be much appreciated.
Absolutely. Because we've got some organizations,
as you know, um, presenting
after you, um, scheduled for 1240.
1240 onwards. Thank you.
Well, thank you Mr. Chair. And,
and thank you, uh, committee members
and, uh, also officials.
Um, I'm sure both, uh, now and, and in the future.
In terms of the interaction, I'm sure
that we're gonna have a look at the heart.
Uh, this bill, um, seeks to do what it says in the title,
and I would say that there is something in the title.
There is a, uh, in terms of the, the lead in, uh,
description, uh, of what the bill's about in terms
of talking about banking, actually a financial institution,
when you go to the, um,
the wording which would change in the legislation,
a financial institution is obviously broader
than, um, just banks.
It also includes insurance, insurers
and non-bank, um, uh, uh, financial organizations as well.
So it's important to recognize that right up front.
Um, this, uh, bill is about the ability
to access financial services.
And I think we all would recognize that financial,
the ability to access financial services is essential
in a modern society.
And that is whether it's to have a bank account, uh,
whether it's potentially to have a credit card, whether it's
to be able to borrow, to buy property, whether it's
to be able to ensure that property, uh, whether it's
to be able to run a borrow, to run a business.
All of those things are essential.
And effectively what it is, is the ability
to participate in our modern economy.
Uh, the financial markets conduct Act 2013 governs financial
institutions, which it defines, uh, in section 4, 4 6 E
as a registered bank, a licensed insurer,
or a licensed non-bank deposit taker,
which are in the business of providing
one or more of those services.
And, um, that's further defined in the financial services,
uh, service providers registration
and disputes resolution Act 2005, which clearly, uh, uh,
includes and defines I insurers.
So I thought I wanted to make that very clear
that insurance is part of this as well.
And actually, I have heard from people about the ability
to access insurance as well as access,
um, uh, banking services.
Um, Mr. Chair, our, our financial institutions are intended
to have a duty to provide customers with financial services.
And I've described what those are, um,
when we talk about a good financial reason.
And, um, uh, Deborah, um, uh, you asked the,
um, not in this public session.
I didn't so you can't refer to it, please.
Oh, and well, you just asked. Oh, sorry. No, you're right.
Okay. Yeah. Okay. I won't then. Yes, fair enough.
Fair enough too. 'cause that last bit
was not in public, was it?
So this is, yeah. Okay. Fair enough.
Yeah, we're now, so look, what is a good, I think I'll,
I'll answer the prospective question about
what a good financial reason is.
Um, a good financial reason is that a customer
or prospective customer represents an undue risk
to the financial institution.
Most of notably, for example, if you lend money to someone,
you wanna be able to get that money back.
You wanna be able to get the, um, uh, any interest
that you're charging on that money back.
So it's the ability to be able to recover that.
Or if it was an insurance situation, it's the ability
to be able to get, uh, you,
you not put yourself at too greater risk.
And of course, that's something which, um,
this committee's already given some attention to in terms
of climate change, um,
and, uh, managed retreat and all those sort of things.
Because there are gonna be times when it is not sensible
for an insurer to provide insurance in some circumstances.
'cause the risk is simply due high.
And that is a perfectly valid, uh, financial reason, um,
for declining services.
So the bill recognizes that.
Um, and, but
what I will shortly outline is this Bill says it's not
reasonable to decline financial services
for purely non-financial reasons.
And to stress, and I would stress this to legal entities,
to people doing legal business,
if you're doing something illegal, completely different.
But if you're doing things which are legal,
and for example, um, the sex industry is one of those
where people have contacted me, that is a legal industry.
That is something that Parliament has specifically legalized
and should therefore be able to operate legally
and be supported to operate legally
by financial institutions.
So the reasons could be, uh, that a bank might de bank you
'cause it doesn't like you or your business.
That could be environmental reasons,
could be social reasons, could be political reasons.
And we even had the leader of a,
what is now a rather popular party in the United Kingdom are
being de banked by, um, some, I think it was NatWest in
that case, uh, saying you effectively don't like your
politics, therefore debunking you.
That is a pretty dangerous place to go.
I spend a bit of time, um, in preparing for this,
looking at the analysis of two recent high court cases,
which have incidentally also highlighted in the
mb uh, briefing.
One was Tiger Capital Limited versus Westpac, New Zealand.
And the other was the Christian Church Community Trust,
AKA Gloria Vale, uh, versus the Bank of New Zealand.
Both of those sought interim injunctions against the
termination of banking services target's.
Uh, applica injunction was declined. Gloria Vale succeeded.
And then the Gloria Vale case was then appealed by the BNZ,
uh, to the Court of Appeal, where, um, they did say, well,
no, you, the BNZ can decline, um, services.
It's interesting to read a Chapman trip article published in
the New Zealand Law Journal in October of 2023,
which referred to those two high court cases
concerning the bank's refusal to provide banking services.
And there's a couple of little bits that I wanted
to highlight the article notes as the end quote.
As these cases highlight,
banks are facing an increasing tension
in their social license to operate.
And I note that this committee has spent a lot
of time looking at the banking industry recently.
Back to the quote. On one hand, they're the gateway
to necessary banking services to allow customers
to participate in modern society.
On the other hand, they have a whole lot of different,
it goes on to talk about the
different responsibilities that banks have.
For example, anti-money laundering,
Russian Sanctions Act, and so on.
Chapman trip, go on to conclude
with competing high court decisions.
In this case, two high court decisions went in different
directions, neither of which needed
to make final decisions on the law,
and neither of which referred to another case, Eran the law.
And, and this is an important,
but the law is left in a state of uncertainty.
That's the current law is left in a state of uncertainty.
In the light of the increasing role of banks as frontline
as the frontliner of matters such as sanctions, A-M-L-C-F-T,
and ESG, it is likely
that banks will be making decisions on de banking customers
with increasing regularity.
This uncertainty is likely to create issues
for banks and their customers.
So whatever we may think about what's in this proposed bill,
there's quite clearly the analysis which has been done there
by Chapman Trip is saying, there is an issue here.
We need to address that. And then Minter Allison and,
and analyzing the Court of appeal decisions.
That was the BNZ appealing against the glory of our one
included the following conclusion, de banking is an issue
for parliament and regulators.
De banking is an issue for parliament and regulators.
The court held that the risk of the glory
of our entities being unable to open accounts with other b,
other New Zealand banks, which I think was the case in
other, was being de banked by BNZ was being de banked
effectively by all of 'em.
'cause nobody else wanted to touch them, was insufficient
to uphold the injunction and force BNZ
to maintain their relationship.
'cause that was part of the original injunction.
Justice Goddard, um, in Obiter comments suggested
that such broader public interest issues are for Parliament
to address not B Z's responsibilities.
It opines on whether BNZ had a public interest obligation
to provide minimal banking facilities
to customers without alternatives.
But this line of argument was not resolved.
Uncertainty again, it also notes
that while some jurisdictions
and impose such obligations by statute, again,
other countries doing different
things, New Zealand does not.
And the court did not find it arguable under common law.
And then the issue of de banking was also raised, uh,
they note in the Commerce Commission's final competition
report on personal banking services.
In response, the Minister of Finance,
the honorable Nicola Willis,
published a revised policy remit for the Reserve Bank
of New Zealand together with a new letter of expectations.
And in that letter, the Minister states,
and it's not quite going to the all of, to dealing
with the right to have a bank account,
but she expects the Reserve Bank to work
with wider government to support the banking industry,
to take actionable steps towards making basic bank accounts
more widely available, ensuring
that every New Zealander has access
to essential banking services without
unnecessary impediments.
So of course, that doesn't enshrine the right
to a bank account, but it certainly sends in
certain, uh, direction.
I would note that the initial briefing also noted
that de banking is not just an issue in New Zealand.
It, uh, the, um, the briefing notes, the UK and Australia,
and earlier this week, the United States, uh, the office
of the comptroller of co of the currency,
the OCC is rolling out new guidance
to discourage banks from de banking customers
for political or religious reasons.
So New Zealand is not unique in this.
Now, I'm sure that there will be plenty of argument
to say that this does not happen.
There is no de banking. This is not necessary to do this.
Um, however, the experience,
and you've heard, uh, some of those around this tape,
in fact, I subbed in one day to FEC
and I heard some of those as well.
Um, some of their customers, um, say that is not the case.
FEC heard from Minerals West Coast
and Strat, that some banks prevent New Zealand coal mining
companies from accessing some
or all of their services, uh, for climate change reasons.
FEC also heard from Kiwibank who said
that they don't lend on the coal, coal and oil
and gas sectors that won't help keep the lights on
or energy prices down Westpac
of cease lending to the coal mining sector.
And that's probably fair enough
because that follows losses in curb when
solid energy collapsed.
Um, because that is a genuine financial risk in that case.
But does one minor operating badly in a particular envi
environment, particular market, does that mean
that other better capitalized, better run, uh,
miners represent the same risk?
I'd suggest to you it probably doesn't.
And then Thomas Coghlan reported in the Herald on the
31st of January this year, um,
headlined BNZ tells coal mine,
it was shut bank accounts by 2030.
Shane Jones wants intervention.
Nicolais wants banks back before the committee.
Um, and what he goes on to say, as a coal mining firm,
was told by the BNZ,
that it would slowly have banking services withdrawn,
culminating in the cancellation of credit cards
and the closure of all bank accounts by 2030,
forcing it to look for another bank.
These included closing the mines asset finance facility
by the beginning of this year, shutting lending facility
by July and canceling credit cards
and closing all accounts by 2030.
Um, and what it then goes on to say, the article goes on
to say the letter comes at a time when New Zealand banks are
coming under intense scrutiny
to the effect their environmental policies are having on
businesses with petrol stations, mining and agriculture,
or voicing fear about being de banked in recent weeks.
And also, um, note that it's worth saying that, um,
MB has noted in the, uh, initial briefing the importance
of coal mining, um,
and saying that, for example,
several banks have announced an intention
to phase out lending services to firms mining coal.
Um, and then hopefully saying that, um, envy's view is
that coal coal remains necessary
for our domestic steel making industry
and the security supply
of electricity in the short to medium term.
Um, and also of course, you know, uh, steel making, uh, uh,
it's a critical element, the motor trades industry.
Likewise, um, this committee has also heard from omo.
They told us that their only,
only their current bank was willing
to continue providing finance.
The others were not willing.
The BNZ indicated indicated that it would reduce lending
to the fossil fuel industry.
New Zealand first has had correspondence from many petrol
stations stating they have been told
that they will not provide credit beyond 2030.
And some have been told that they'll need
to pay off their loans over the final five years to 2030.
And for many of them, that will be or completely impossible.
Uh, in an article in the post 17th of February this year,
Lee Marshall, the Chief executive,
have promoted trade association wrote.
Banks have said that their policies do not extend
to fuel retailers, but this is at direct odds to
what station owners are telling us.
To quote one, the NZBA, the net,
net zero banking alliance is greenwashing in the extreme.
The Motor Trade Association,
which has almost a thousand service station members,
has heard from many stories from business owners
who were denied funding for things such
as essential building upgrades
or denied outright as why omo Chief Executive Simon Parham.
Uh, Parham told this committee, uh, last year, put bluntly
because we sell hydrocarbons.
The major banks are now deaking us.
Um, and they, the service station owners,
they're not giant multinationals, most of them,
but many of them are, uh, you know, individual mom
and dad, um, operated businesses.
Um, and they not only now face the challenge of make his,
uh, as his article goes on to say,
not only face the challenge of making a dollar in an
industry of tight margins
and the risk of crime, they now also face the prospect
of being able to being unable to sell their business.
After all, who would want to buy a business
that cannot be financed, federated farmers?
Uh, the article goes on to say, uh, has, um,
which has done much to put this on the public radar,
it's calling on the Commerce Commission
to investigate the bank's adherence to the NCBA.
Um, and the one that surprised me when my bill was drawn,
I also heard PE from people working in
or even letting property to the sex industry being affected.
For example, I was con I was contacted
by a property owner in Auckland trying very hard,
in very difficult circumstances,
particularly when COVID was affecting her, um,
to, uh, lease a property.
The property was proposed to be leased to a sex, um,
work, uh, business.
Um, and what immediately happened is a was difficult
to get both financed and, um, insurance
and the insurance cost abruptly doubled.
I've also met with the secondhand
and lending industry, particularly an organization
called Cash Converters.
They were de banked by their existing bank,
I think it was Westpac from Emory.
Uh, they, um, then tried
to get banking services from all
the other banks in the country.
Couldn't get it from any of them, the only one.
And they, and this was a business which was both profitable
and sound, uh, financially, um, if they finally have managed
to get one from a small building society,
which seriously limited that business's ability
to do its job.
So those, uh, are some of the stories which I've heard,
and I'm looking forward to hearing other stories
as we go through this process.
These are stories where customers do not see the financial
services battlefield as being anything like fair.
This bill is about trying to level the field for most of us,
most customers, and it is even big organizations
to take on the financial institution,
is a David and Goliath battle.
Now, most battles go to the big guy
David only defeated Goliath with a slingshot and a stone.
'cause he had a big guy on his side.
We are the big guy in this.
The government is the big guy in this
to level that playing field.
The question we face is whether the people can have faith
that is faith in the state to provide a fair battlefield.
There is clearly an issue
and it's clearly a growing one, not just in New Zealand.
Question is, should parliament,
what should parliament say about the right
of a financial institution to don deny services?
And I would suggest to you that if the wording needs
to be amended and massage is the principle
that is the important thing in this bill.
I look forward to reading and hearing submissions on my
bill, which will bring out stories which will well, uh,
and which are well under the bar of any of the cases
that I referred to before.
Oh, thank you Mr. Foster. Very well articulated. Indeed.
We've got time for, uh, three questions.
I'm gonna go to Dr. Woods first.
Thank you. And thank you for your submission.
Um, one of the things you used in your submission,
you used the word customer quite a bit.
Um, one of the things that is very confusing in your bill is
around definitions of consumer.
Um, it's at odds with other legislation, um,
that we have particularly around, um, wholesale,
wholesale clients
and wholesale commun uh,
consumer is not a term used in any other legislation
that we are seeing there.
Um, and it's not clear whether
or not wholesale consumer is intended to be a different
or a new, um, concept to wholesale clients
or wholesale investors.
I just want you to expand for the committee
because one of the risks may mean
that the bill may not apply
to large wholesale industries in attending to apply
for farming and mining
because they are not consumer activities.
So, um, in terms of the workability of that
and why you use those terms in drafting the bill.
Look, I, I think the key point is it's
about customers more than anything else.
So, you know, so it's new term that that is the right,
the right term is, is, I mean, we,
banks would usually talk about customers,
But throughout the, the bill that we had
before us, the term consumer is
what is in the drafted legislation.
I'm just trying to understand Yeah,
why you chose the terms you did
and the bill that we're examining now.
Well, it's interesting things that, that got, uh, let
through with those kind of words to, um, to use the word,
um, consumer rather than customer.
But, um, I think the, the, the key issue is
that the principle is the important one.
What the actual final word that we end up with,
I'm pretty relaxed about, but it needs to be one
that works in terms of the, the rest of the legislation.
So what I'm just, sorry, I'm, I'm not kind
of understanding fully.
When you were drafting the legislation,
you departed from the conducts
of financial institutions accepted, um, definitions
that we had around there and,
and particularly the consumer
protections that were put in place.
I'm just trying to understand your thinking of why it is
that you chose to depart, um, from those terms
and those definitions that are there
around those consumer protections.
Just so we can understand that when we hear from submitters,
You look pretty relaxed about
what the wording finally ends up being in terms
of the definition is what the clear thing is, is the people
who have to transact business with,
with the banks is the key point.
With whatever word is the most appropriate word to use.
Use is the word we should use. Okay. Right, sure. Okay.
A really good question. Um,
do you believe it is legitimate for banks to choose
to not lend to fossil fuel industries here inoa based on the
risk profile that they present?
The only reason that you would do that,
and I think the problem is,
and I take say, for example, take the, um,
the Motor Trades Association, is that if all the banks were
to follow the example that BNZ has done, um,
they would terminate that collection of businesses.
They would, they would be the ones who would terminate.
Not necessarily anything else.
And that's, that's, that's the distinction.
If you, if you think of the business is gonna go out
of business over a period of time
and you are, you're confident about that.
But I mean, I I would suggest to you in
that particular situation,
we have a motor vehicle fleet in this country,
which the average age is 14 years. What
About things like coal mining?
Well, I think we actually need coal mining at the moment
'cause the lights are gonna go out.
But do you think banks should be able to make a, a,
a decision based on the risk profile
that industries like 4%?
Well, I guess the question is
where is the risk coming from?
The biggest risk probably is the
government in, in these situations
Set us up on that. Okay.
I mean, remember, just remember all of the, all all
of these are legal businesses at the moment and,
and banks potentially end up, um, knocking the le you know,
basically by deban them terminating legal businesses.
That should be the decision made
as the government has just been doing
or is in the process of doing to terminate the greyhound,
um, industry bank, uh, we did that,
or the government does, did that.
Not anybody else. Not a bank. Okay. Except from
Dr. Woods. So just
interesting in kind of following that logic through.
So you're looking to legislate
what would normally be a commercial decision, uh,
by an institution for them
to make their own risk assessments when it comes to these,
are you thinking about legislation
to force any other industries into
offering particular services?
Or is it just confined, um, to, to banking and insurance?
Or is, are you saying this as a bit of a gateway to,
to further legislating?
What would usually in our economy be commercial decisions?
Um, I don't think it's been any contemplation whatsoever
given to, um, expanding that.
But, um, I think the, the, the key issue there is
where does a commercial decision stop
and where does a decision made
for a non-commercial reason start? So
Why just confine it to banking and insurance?
If, if that's where you're thinking that it is the role of,
uh, a, of government
and legislation to override those commercial decisions,
why would you only confine it to banking and insurance?
I think those are the only ones that we're aware of doing,
I guess, I guess you could probably point that
to most pieces of legislation say,
why didn't it fix everything on the planet?
Most of 'em don't. They, they pick a particular
bit and deal with that.
Okay. Uh, Dr. Russell
Just wanna, um, make a comment.
First of all, you pulled in some pretty contentious examples
from overseas culture wars.
We don't need any more overseas culture
wars important to New Zealand.
Um, so that's just a, a comment in general,
but I also think that, um,
I I just wanna pick apart this purely commercial reason
you spoke of social license as well.
I don't understand why, you know,
a bank looking at its social license
and they do need social license to operate,
but that just flows straight
through into commercial reasons.
Why shouldn't it consider the concerns of many,
its its customers that a bank not be involved
with the fossil fuel fuel industry.
That's a commercial consideration.
I, I guess the challenge with these things is we are a,
um, a society with a lot of different values
and a lot of different thoughts that other people will think
that they have strayed into the wrong
territory by de banking people.
But surely they'll lose
their customers if they go too far.
You know, they depend on having a license to operate.
If we think that lots of people are quite okay
with the fossil fuel industry, the banks will read
that quite happily and continue to offer services.
Well, I guess there's been some direction from,
you might say, direction from the top in terms of
where we go with some
of those things and what, well, sorry, who,
Who's, who's given the direction?
Oh, I think you'd probably say there's a
different flavor of governments.
Um, this one versus the previous one.
In terms I don't single government,
which has told banks not to, um,
have certain customers this is this go. Yeah.
Well, I, I would suggest you, um, Mr.
Chair through you that, um, you know, the last government,
um, terminated certain industries
or said they wanted to terminate them.
Oh, no. But this government
has said that it wanted to carry them on.
Yes. But that's not the same. We
Did not, but it does send a message.
How does it does send a message, and how
Does that relate to, okay, let's,
let's not debate I'm submitters
Makes sense. No, he's not a
submitter. Well, does It
make sense person Promoting
this bill? Yeah. I, and asking
His bill, he chose various provisions.
Okay. When you have a right to scrutinize
Them. Yeah,
there's, there's a lot of submitters.
Mr. Foster brought up the ambiguity around valid
and verifiable commercial reason.
Isn't that just, you could drive a truck through that.
Any commercial organization could use that as a workaround
or, or what you see as a, you know, what's your definition
of a valid and verifiable, um, commercial reason
that would still make this bill workable?
Two points to make. The first one of them is,
at the moment we, I, I equated an as does the advice
that the committee has had, uh, two, uh, court cases, uh,
both of which, um, contested whether banks had the right
to essentially to de to de bank,
um, two different organizations.
Um, those, and
and I also quoted to it for you, the,
the legal assessment of that.
The question then becomes whether in fact you try
and clarify the law
or whether you just say, well, we'll let anybody
who has the means, which most people do not, uh, take that
to, uh, take that to court.
Okay. Right. Anything else, members, and any points or
otherwise, we just, Dr. Woods, um,
It's just in terms of the, um, number of submitters raise,
uh, may raise, um, the, the regulatory
and the statutory duty to provide financial services,
but, um, restricting the principle of freedom of contract,
um, in terms of what that does in terms
of the duty interferes with their ability to make decisions,
um, that, that they put in place.
How, how do you think this sits within the rest
of New Zealand's, uh, commercial legislative framework
that would have a, a pace here that is effectively
infringing on that freedom of contract?
Well, I mean, all it's saying is that if some, if a, um,
prospective customer, um, has, uh,
it does not represent a commercial risk,
then why would you deny them a service,
which is absolutely essential
to operate in a modern society.
So the act will define the commercial risk. Sorry.
So are you looking at amendments to define the commercial
Work? If the committees
with legislation believe,
if the committee believes it needs to be more tightly
defined, then fine. So we'll
Say what commercial risk is for a
Particular, if you believe that it needs that.
Um, I would've thought, no, no, no.
I'm asking you As a director.
Well, I, I don't believe it needs particularly, um,
tight definition to try
and work out what a commercial risk looks like.
But you may believe that it does.
Well, and the fact
that you are overriding commercial risk, that's the point
of your bill, is you are saying you are
restricting the ability of, um, businesses
to define their own commercial risk.
You are, you are overriding that with the legislation.
And I think one of the things that we are grappling with
and want to understand is, as the drafter of the bill,
how you say that that's gonna sell alongside that,
how are you gonna determine what that commercial risk is?
Look, no, quite specifically,
the bill does not override the commercial risk.
What it is saying is that non-commercial reasons are the,
are the things which are being overridden.
Mm. Okay. I'm gonna go to
Dan and shouldn't, they shouldn't be hard for a bank
to be able to say, to demonstrate this particular
proposition is a commercial risk
Without a definition. Okay.
Dan, what? They should be able To work
that one out. Dan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, good day, Andy.
I, um, just wanted to go back to the point
that the chair made around workarounds
and virtually every submitter from the industry has said
that this bill has likely to create bureaucracy.
I'm just wondering what you would say to that.
I shall be interested in hearing them
and quizz them on whether it will or not.
I do note that banks have been pretty good at responding
to some bits of legislation
and have created the most monumental
and horrendous bureaucracy.
Um, just refer to the a ML, uh, legislation, uh,
that you could possibly think of.
And if you wanted a gatekeeper,
it's not just one gatekeeper, it's about a hundred in a row.
Mm-hmm. So they probably are pretty good at doing it.
Maybe they should think about doing it better. Oh,
It's pretty, we haven't got a camera on the banker's
association's face at the moment.
Okay. Um, Ricardo, you gonna wind us up? Thanks, guys.
Nice. Okay.
Um, Ricardo, and then we're gonna,
then we're gonna go to, um, Roger
More. I know that we
didn't focus on mining industries,
but your senior colleagues have used those industries
as the key example to justify as well.
So I wanted to ask what work you did
to understand the existing commercial risk
of industries like coal mining in the context of, um, uh,
how banks operate in the decisions that they make.
Because in the public realm,
that has been the prime example that has been used.
And so do you believe that that's one
of the key barriers you're trying to address,
or your senior more senior colleagues Rob? Could,
Can you, can you re um, state that again, mining,
Actually coal mining has been used
by your more senior colleagues as the key reason in industry
that is facing barriers and, um, to justify your bill.
What work did you do to assess the existing commercial risk
of industries like coal mining, um, to, to be able
to be well informed in pushing this
Bill forward?
Well, I, as I said, um, I did refer to, uh, Westpac, well,
first thing I'd say is that, um, quite clearly that was, um,
there was an nexus between the timing of, uh,
this bill being submitted and, uh, the, uh, some of the, uh,
publicity was around around mining
and mining not being able to get access to banking.
So there is an nexus between those two things in terms
of the, uh, of the risk.
I did note the solid energy situation that Westpac had said,
Hey, we, we don't wanna be involved in this particular, uh,
proposition because solid energy clearly failed as,
as an entity, uh, now
that was in a particular environment in a particular time.
Uh, does that mean that's always gonna be the case?
No, it doesn't. But, um, you know, any banking aid, uh,
organization should be looking at, uh, a business.
It's likely revenue stream. It's likely cost stream.
And being able to say, well, it does that represent a
reasonable business to invest in, whether it's mining
or any other business.
Okay. We've got the very last one,
sun Promise afterwards short, and then we're gonna go to
Short stuff that, how do you imagine, uh,
that banks are gonna balance, um, this
with their scope three scope,
scope three emission disclosures.
Oh, interesting. I guess we'll wait for
how legislation evolves on those sort of things as well. So
You're going scrap the requirement to dec
I dunno, but I know, I know
Disclosures around scope three,
I know that there are other pieces of
legislation which should been proposed as well.
So we'll see what happens with
Those. Right? Yeah. So
She's taxing under the status quo. Yeah.
This legislation is proceeding, uh,
while we have the climate related disclosure
framework in place.
So how is this gonna interact?
Okay, let's find In terms, no,
this is a valid question.
Yeah, we're over time in terms of how it is that we,
that the banks are gonna balance
that insurance companies with Scope three.
Um, well, there's, um, let's hypothesize that those sort
of issues will be addressed elsewhere,
So it's gonna be repealed.
Okay. Mr. Foster announcement, thank you very much.
No, I didn't. Thank you very much, Mr. Foster.
Um, Farrah presentation and interrogation.
Interesting. Thank you very much. We're gonna now welcome
announce in the New Zealand Banking Association,
Roger Beaumont, here's some sensible people, um, members,
we've got 10 minutes per submitter, which take, uh,
to one 30 if we, we are in your hands if we go over that.
We'll try and keep to 10 minutes for, um, submission.
So, welcome,
Uh, thank you Mr. Chair
and Koto.
I'm Roger Beaumont, excuse me, the, uh, chief Executive
of the New Zealand Banking Association,
and with me today is NZ B'S policy director
and legal counsel, Sam shoot, uh, NZBA.
And our members do not support this bill
for reasons I'll outline shortly.
But first, uh, I'd like to address some
of the understandable concerns that have led
to this bill being introduced
and why they, they are perceptions
of banking in New Zealand rather than the reality.
Uh, as set out in the general policy statement,
there are concerns that banks are withdrawing services
for political views and wokeness.
Given some of the media headlines I've seen,
I can understand how that perception, uh, has arisen.
This bill is based on a serious misunderstanding.
It ignores the fact that banks make credit decisions
based on commercial reasons, not on the basis
of murky moralizing.
The reality is that no industry
or customer group is being Deb banked.
As part of some murky conspiracy,
some individual banks have made individual commercial
decisions to not lend to a business,
but banks have not done this as a collective.
Uh, and this is not the first time authorities have
looked into these issues.
The Commerce Commission has investigated
and found that there is no cozy cartel
of banks operating under the net zero banking alliance,
despite accusations to the contrary.
Uh, last year's commerce commission market study,
and this very committee's recent year long inquiry
into banking competition were comprehensive studies
of the industry and neither
identified woke de banking as an issue.
That's because it isn't one.
Banks are making, uh,
each making commercial decisions on a case
by case basis based on regulatory requirements
and their individual risk appetite.
Banks may assess their exposure to sectors in the loan book
as part of their ongoing overall risk management,
and this may mean they limit further lending
to either an individual business
or increase lending to another, but each, excuse me.
But each bank decides that separately,
and each bank has a different loan book
and a different risk appetite.
And depending on market conditions,
they may well change their view.
Again, sometimes a bank, uh, does get this wrong.
Uh, not continuing to lend to video rental companies
turned out to be the right commercial decision,
but stopping credit to bookstores was not.
It's a fine line.
And banks, like any business,
make their own commercial decisions
and risk appetite decisions every single day.
And banks are not making these calls
for wokeness reasons or political favor.
Uh, this is obvious
because banks aren't promoting these decisions.
The news stories come from disgruntled customers
and their backers or advocates.
If wokeness was the reason to limit lending banks,
media teams might well be issuing press releases,
seeking favorable coverage.
I have the utmost sympathy for customers
who can no longer obtain credit from their bank
and may be struggling
to find another lender to give them finance.
Sometimes that is simply the reality of the financial state
of that company or the customer,
rather than some conspiracy against a particular sector.
Our member banks acknowledge
that banking is a fundamental service
and are supporting the Reserve Bank's policy work on
enhancing access to banking
alongside the recent anti-money laundering changes.
So, despite the unfounded perception,
this bill isn't fixing an actual problem.
However, if it were to become law, it could create a range
of problems by creating more bureaucracy
and regulatory uncertainty in the lending process,
this bill could slow down access to credit
for legitimate businesses
and customers who would normally get their lending
easily approved.
The threat of jail time may influence a banker's decision
making, uh, and the credit outcome for that business
or customer as existing banking conduct legislation already
protects New Zealanders from, uh, unjustifiable refusal
or withdrawal of banking services.
Uh, this government is focused on cutting red tape
and economic growth.
This bill would be a blow to both goals
and undermine the principle that businesses should determine
who they do business with.
The banking industry is working hard
to ensure it delivers on recommendations from the Commerce
Commission, this select committee,
and other important regulatory changes such as open banking
and triple CFA reform.
Uh, this committee's inquiry correctly identified
that one barrier to lending to certain sectors
is the risk weighting requirements that are set
for sectors such as agriculture.
The Reserve Bank's consultation on, on its review
of capital setting settings proposes
to lower some of those risk weights.
This could encourage more lending
to those sectors if the proposals go through
these work streams should smooth the path to easier banking,
easier access to banking, more streamlined credit processes,
and improved economic growth.
This bill gets in the way of those processes
for those reasons, we oppose it
and we are now happy to take your
questions. Okay, thank you Mr.
Mont. I'm gonna go to Dr. David Wilson first.
Um, thank you for that, Mr. Mont.
Um, just a, a simple question.
I heard the words commercial risk used
and, um, noted with some irony that, uh,
our friends across the is there, were quite happy
with those words in this context.
However, um, given that your statement is
around commercial risk, not moral ideological reasons,
can you confirm that's what you're saying today?
Well, I just said it, yes.
Okay. That's all I needed to say.
The other thing I might add is that, um,
the direction towards lowering the risk weighting tolerances
for some sectors in, um, in our community
is a directive or a, a mandate
or even a recommendation from this committee
and possibly coming into law, which I think underscores
the social license to operate
and the role of our government in the banking sector.
That's good. And so is it likely that you will see
that this will flow through into
conduct in the banking sector?
Well, well, the banking sector is all already very well
regulated in terms of its conduct expectations.
Uh, so we've got the, um, the, uh, financial
and prudential regulation from the Reserve Bank
and then, uh, conduct regulation that the, um, uh,
that the, uh, um,
Conduct, uh, of financial institutions. Yes. C
Yes. Sorry,
that the FMA, that's, that's what I-F-M-A-I
Know this is almost like asking you
to predict what's gonna happen,
but in terms of the risk weighting requirements
that may eventuate, do you think that will be
substantially moved into the banking
sector on that requirement? Well,
We're in consultation on that,
and if some of those changes go, go through as proposed
by the Reserve Bank, I don't wanna second guess that,
but that could well, um, have some influence on availability
of credit to those sectors.
Yeah. Thank you. Okay. Uh, Ricardo? Many as much. Yeah.
A lot of talks by, um, ministers
and government has been in relationship
to the fossil fuel industry in particularly coal mining.
Um, what message do you wanna send in relationship
to accusations that, uh, banks have not, for example,
lended, uh,
fossil fuel industries like coal mining companies on the
basis of, uh, uh, decisions
that are not to do with commercial risk?
Well, uh, I would dispute
that they're making those decisions, uh, that, that,
that it's a risk assessment.
The very fundamentals
of banking is about making assessments,
about lending on a credit risk basis.
Uh, and so those decisions are made on a, on a daily basis.
Thank you. Okay. I think we'll leave it there.
That's, we're at time. Thank you very much
to the New Zealand Banking Association.
We appreciate your submission. Thank you. Thanks, Roger.
Thank you. Okay.
That brings us to the Insurance Council of New Zealand.
Susan Ivory here, and,
and I don't know who the other chap is.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair.
Well, I'll introduce myself. Yeah,
Please introduce.
Good afternoon everyone. It's a whole new
generation of mps now.
I spent some time, um, good afternoon.
I'm Chris Far Foy, uh, for those of you who I haven't met.
Um, and I'm the Chief executive of the Insurance Council.
Um, I've got our regulatory affairs manager.
I see ivory next to me.
I'll take our submission as largely read.
But, um, we did want to make sure that we, um,
pointed out some concerns that we do have with the bill.
Um, as we said in our, um, submission,
the ICNZ members strongly opposed the bill.
Uh, firstly, the bill is broader than required
to address its policy objectives.
The explanatory note in the bill makes it clear
that the bill is primarily aimed at addressing, uh, uh,
the issue of possible non-pro provision of banking services.
Um, but the bill would capture, uh, insurance
as it's currently drafted, if passed the build,
would create uncertainty, complexity,
and additional costs that would make it harder
to offer insurers to consumers
and businesses in New Zealand.
Um, obliging insurers to provide insurance cover
to specific customers may have unintended negative
consequences, uh, for the insurers wider pool
of customers on pricing and on insurance, uh, availability.
And the drafting of the bill is confusing, uh,
and inconsistent with the overall design of the CFI regime,
uh, that it seeks to amend.
Uh, the CFI regime is designed to protect the interests
of consumers, uh, not businesses, um,
around the potential impact on the
insurance industry itself.
The bill presents challenges to insurers
by placing potential restrictions on risk selection
and underwriting processes.
Individual insurers have a range of legitimate reasons
for ensuring or not ensuring, uh, a customer.
And these include, um, the risk may be outside an insurer's,
um, business or expertise.
Uh, in many cases, the insurer specializes in certain types
of insurance, uh, such as motor insurance
and liability insurance.
Uh, in some cases, the specific risk may be
outside an insurer's risk appetite.
Um, for example, a natural hazard risk, uh, at a specific
location, and an insurer may not currently offer cover
to certain industries for a range of commercial reasons.
And this can include industries
or customers that the insurer considers represent,
um, excessive risk.
Um, it's not clear how some of these decisions will be,
um, assessed under the bill.
Uh, and restricting insurers' ability
to decline an application for insurance
or determine the terms on which they offer insurance
could force insurers to take on risks,
which they might not otherwise take.
And this carries the risk of unintended, um, consequences
for all an insurers' customers.
Uh, and a scenario like that where an insurer we're forced
to provide cover to customers, they could present a risk
to the insurer's pool of customers.
Um, other customers may suffer unintended consequences
on pricing and insurance and reinsurance availability.
Uh, we are concerned that the bill would increase the
possibility that a regulator may seek
to challenge an insurers underwriting decisions.
Uh, and this could result in litigation
and additional compliance
and record keeping burdens on insurers,
and this would likely be passed on to consumers.
Uh, we consider that the battle is not required,
but would create a new
and unnecessary compliance burden with no benefit
to New Zealand consumers, uh, and businesses.
Um, referring directly to some, uh,
provisions within the bill, uh, section 4 4 6 J, um,
we believe that this provision provides
that a financial institution must not treat a consumer less
favorably because of environmental, social,
or government considerations.
Uh, these considerations may be directly relevant
to providing pricing on certain types of insurance.
Insurers may explicitly consider governance issues.
For example, liability policies where the governance
of an entity is directly relevant
to the risks being underwritten.
Uh, insurers may also
explicitly consider environmental issues.
For examples, the environmental risks
of oil spills in relation to marine insurance,
and insurers may also explicitly consider the probability
of natural hazards impacting a location, uh,
in underwriting property insurance.
Um, very quickly, Mr.
Chair, section 4 4 6 J one B four,
uh, this provision provides
that a financial institution must not treat a customer less
favorably because
of the industry within which the consumer operates.
This is problematic because insurance products may be
relevant to specific sectors
and insurers may specialize in specific sectors.
For example, when providing property insurance, the nature
of the facility and the activity that's undertaken at
that facility is central to the risk being transferred
and to whether an insurer offers
insurance and on what terms.
And finally, section 4, 4 6 JA two A, this provision refers
to valid and verifiable commercial reasons.
It's unclear, as has been noted earlier,
what this test would mean in practice.
And it is unclear what extra element,
the word valid, uh, introduces.
It's also unclear how verifiable should be interpreted.
We've, um, the questions we have is,
does this mean verifiable in terms
of the insurer's internal practices and record keeping,
or does it mean that the insurer can demonstrate to a court
or regulator that the decision makes sense commercially?
And we do anticipate that the new test would lead
to litigation, compliance costs
and uncertainty, uh, for insurance companies.
Okay. Happy to take any questions? Yep.
Very good. Thank you. Now I've got, uh, first thanks Mr.
Chair. Thanks, Chris. And Susan, good to see you both.
Um, just wanting to know, and thank you for your submission.
In essence, what would you say is the, the, uh,
likely unintended consequences if this
legislation goes forward on the industry
and on, um, customers
and the products that they receive from
the insurance industry?
I think the, the, the biggest risk to consumers, um, is
that, uh, insurers would be required, um,
within their own internal processes, uh, to make sure
that it can argue the case around the validity
of a commercial decision.
I mean, we're talking about assessing risk.
This is the bread and butter of, uh, our, our members.
They make commercial decisions every day.
Um, some of those decisions might be unpopular, um,
with the people seeking that insurance.
And if they were able to challenge that, um, then,
and our members were forced to defend that, um,
then there are processes
and costs that would be involved if there were to be, uh,
a legal process or a regulatory process.
Mm. So, you know, um, in that instance, um,
people are already finding cost of living challenges,
difficult, um, insurance amongst that,
and we are concerned about what impact
that would have on prices for consumers. Thank you.
Yep. Start from Dr. Woods. I,
I think you've pretty much answered my question.
Thank you for your submission.
Um, just to, to clarify what you're saying is a consequence
of this is it could push up insurance premiums
for households and businesses.
Well, it certainly would mean that, uh, if the bill is,
is drafted at the moment, that our members would have
to be wary of the regulatory pressure of that.
Thank you. Okay. Uh, who else has got, it kind of
Leads into my, was exactly that.
I just wanted to be for you to kind of clearly articulate
where, what do you see as the additional compliance costs,
et cetera, the members you represent, and
Yeah, look, uh, if, if, um, there were a challenge
to the underwriting decisions for our members, uh, whether
that be a regulatory process
and, um, the powers that the regulators, regulators have
to ask questions
or would be a litigation process, if this went, uh,
to a court case, that would obviously have the, um,
our members would want to
make sure they're prepared for that.
And in any instances where there were challenges
that would obviously have cost, um, we,
we are worried about the instances
where someone could be litigious or vexatious, um,
and not be happy with a decision,
an underwriting decision that is made.
Um, and at this stage with the, with the way
that the bill is drafted, it'd be unclear where some
of those thresholds would be.
Thank you. Okay. We'll leave it at that. Thank you, Susan.
Thank you, Chris. Thank you. Your presentation, you both.
Okay. Now that brings us to the legislation design
and, uh, advisory committee.
Hi.
Good, Good afternoon. Uh,
Good afternoon.
My name's Carl Simpson and with me Simon Pet.
We are members of the Legislation
Design and Advisory Committee.
So, as you're probably aware, uh,
the committee has a mandate from cabinet
to review legislation against the guidelines
and make submissions to select committees.
Um, our focus is on the, the workability of legislation
and its design rather than on policy.
So our comments will be restricted to those matters.
Uh, I'll just cover a couple of key points
and then I'll hand over to Simon
to cover some of the detail.
So, um, as we understand it,
and as we've heard, one of the main purposes of the bill is
to ensure that access to banking services is not undermined
by unfavorable treatment on things like environmental,
social, or governance grounds.
Uh, we recommend the bill doesn't proceed.
We have three main points.
The proposed amendments are novel.
The bill would create an open-ended duty
for private businesses to supply all comers
with imprisonment for failure to do so.
Secondly, it's unlikely in our view
that the bill will achieve its objective.
That's because acting in accordance
with ESG type considerations is generally considered
to be a valid commercial strategy.
And thirdly, the bill is a poor fit
with the Financial Markets Conduct Act.
That ACT uses civil enforcement for most
of its contraventions.
And the proposed definitions, as have been discussed,
are inconsistent with definitions in the
Financial Markets Conduct Act.
So I'll pass on to Simon
to cover some things in more detail,
and then we'll leave some time for questions.
Uh, so just to expand slightly on the points that, uh,
that Carl has made, um, starting
with the significantly coercive nature of the obligation,
um, it is very unusual in New Zealand law
to create an obligation to supply services,
even essential utility services.
Um, you think, for example, electricity line services,
which is about as close as you
could get to an essential service.
We have, um, consumer protection requirements
around particularly medically dependent consumers,
but there is no generic obligation to continue supplying
or to take on new customers for electricity.
Uh, to the extent that New Zealand law has
provided in the past for continuing obligations to supply,
it's tended to be in the context of privatization
of previously publicly provided services.
So, for example, pre 1993, um, electricity connections.
So this would be a reasonably significant extension of the,
you know, coercive power, um,
to require the provision of these services.
Um, secondly, you have heard
and will hear a lot about, um, the uncertain scope,
uh, of the obligations.
In our advice. We focus principally on the tension
between the primary prohibition, uh,
and the exception for valid and, um,
and verifiable commercial reasons.
Um, as Carla said, for for the most part, uh,
when a company is having regard to ESG considerations,
it is doing so for commercial purposes, uh,
because it is determined
that it is in its commercial interests, in the interests
of the company and its shareholders to take account
of those matters, either
because those considerations are specific
to the commercial strategy that it's pursuing, uh, or
because there will be negative, uh,
impacts on the company if it does not have regard
to those considerations.
Um, so there is an inherent tension between,
on the one hand, prohibiting having regard to those matters.
And on the other hand, saying that it's legitimate
to have regard to valid
and verifiable commercial reasons from a sort
of legislative design perspective, when we're trying
to resolve that tension, it leaves you in really one
of two situations.
Um, either we are saying that, uh, you know, having regard
to ESG matters is, you know,
a valid commercial consideration,
in which case the prohibition has little or no effect.
Uh, or alternatively, we're saying that having regard to
ESG considerations as effectively deemed
to be a non-commercial consideration,
in which case the exception has little or no effect.
Um, and that tension has to be resolved in order for this
to be a, a workable regime.
Um, there are another other, a number of other aspects of
uncertainty and the drafting.
And just to choose one more, the, the concept of validity,
it's not clear to me in what capacity that term is used.
Uh, you know, validity in the legal sense means
that something is extent or enforce.
I think in this context it's used
to mean something more like genuine or sincerely held.
Um, but that is a, you know, a, a term
that has some ambiguity
of construction when used in this particular context.
Uh, and then lastly, as Karl has said,
the reasonably draconian nature
of the consequences does not sit comfortably alongside the,
um, enforcement provisions, um, of the FMCA, um,
which primarily relies on ary penalties and,
and civil penalties rather than, um,
rather than a criminal regime.
Um, so there is a, a tension in that.
Uh, and also just a question about whether
or not, um, this nature is intrinsic, that this conduct, um,
well, this obligation is intrinsically
criminal in its character, um, and
therefore warrants a criminal penalty as opposed to a,
a civil enforcement regime.
Okay. Questions, points, clarification.
No, it's really clear. That's pretty short. Okay.
Loud and clear. Thank you so much. Thank you. Thank you.
Okay. Now we've got the parliamentary commissioner
of the environment, the right honorable Simon Upton.
Is he online yet? Yes, he ran. Okay.
Very good. Commissioner.
Good afternoon. Good to see you again.
We're in your hands. Oh, welcome. Thank you.
I'm sorry I'm not with you today. Um, Mr.
Chairman, I'm actually in Marlborough
and where I've been looking at Wilding Pines,
and I hope one day I can talk to you about that
because your committee's got some serious fiscal, uh, risks,
um, coming your way from Wilding Pines.
But don't let me divert you.
It's a much more interesting topic I for you.
Oh, we look forward to that presentation.
Um, look, you've heard this from others,
but I just want to underline, uh, the extraordinarily broad,
uh, drafting, uh, any direct
or indirect environmental consideration.
So lenders are somehow supposed to just ignore any front,
uh, any, anything on the environmental front at all.
Now I just wanna read one sentence
from my written submission.
That's to say that environmental risks are just that
they are risks, not moralizing.
Uh, environmental risks entail valid reasons
for lenders to decline to lend.
Now, if you want to understand
what risks we're talking about,
there's a handy little table at the bottom of page two
of my submission, which breaks it out.
And, and it's not just one monolithic thing,
it's a whole variety of risks there.
But one of them, you'll see chronic longer term shifts
in climate patterns.
And that can mean that a whole series of activities
that we can do now
and rely on being able to do
may not be possible in the future,
whether it's living in a house in a, uh, flood stream, uh,
whether it's living on a coast, which is going
to be eroding or whatever.
Now, the only point I want to make
before asking you if you've got any
questions is simply this.
I want to remind this committee hearing this
evidence on this bill, that it has issued a report,
an inquiry into climate adaptation,
and two of your recommendations, you simply
have to take regard to.
You cannot recommend this bill proceed
'cause it flies 180 degrees against your
own advice as a committee.
Let me read it up. Allowing asset prices
to better reflect long-term natural hazard risk.
The more that asset
and insurance prices reflect risk,
the more efficient outcomes will be.
This bill asks you to ignore the accurate pricing of risks
and you will get inefficient outcomes.
You recommended that we should be minimizing.
Moral hazard situations should be avoided,
where property owners are disincentivized to manage risk
because they don't face the full cost of risks materializing
Now, if you decide to exclude any reference
to environmental risks as they relate, for instance,
to adaptation, you are effectively saying
that people should be shielded from the
consequences of risks.
And that'll have to be picked up
by society might be picked up through higher premiums,
ultimately picked up by taxpayers.
So very simply, the bill, certainly in its present,
drafting flies completely contrary to the advice
that this committee has given
to the government and to the house.
And for that reason, it should be withdrawn. Thank you.
Okay. Very good. Uh,
Mr. Foster?
Yeah, Simon. Nice. Nice to see you there.
And thanks for the comments about Wilding Pines.
We'll look forward to more on that.
But, um, I would've thought that, uh, actual physical risk
to a property, if you're thinking about financing
and ensuring it, whatever it might be, is a real
financial risk.
Uh, I mean the, it's an environmental risk,
but it's also real financial risk.
And I don't see why that is not perfectly well captured in
saying, um, you don't want
to ensure you don't wanna finance whatever it might be a
property that you think will be likely to be, you know,
damaged by flood or whatever else it might be.
Well, you need to look at the drafting of your bill.
I think Mr. Foster, because you've left that open for debate
and as one of your previous, uh, submitters said,
you're gonna have to sort this out in the course.
Either it's gonna be one or it's gonna be the other.
The question I'd ask is, well, where do you draw that line?
How much of a risk you might have a view that, oh,
that's too far in the distance.
Or you might have a view that, oh,
we're not really too worried about,
about climate mitigation risk.
We allow adaptation risk.
You are sitting there, it seems to me, trying
to tell investors and trying to tell those who lend
and insurers what they should and shouldn't take account of.
But there is no clarity around that.
I'm sure there will be en environmental risks.
You could fit into the wording your bill,
but it will ultimately end up being decided by courts.
And I don't think the, the,
the financial insurance industry would have any difficulty
showing that a, a large number of issues under policy
and regulatory risk.
You know, why should they not be able to take account
of the policy and regulatory risks
that flow from changing governments?
They've gotta look beyond elections.
They can't run their lives in three year tranches.
They have to take a view. Is climate
going to be a serious risk?
For instance, is water gonna be a serious risk?
We've decided we are going to err on the side of having
to face the fact that in the future, people will have
to do something, so therefore we adjust our lending
accordingly, or we adjust our insurance cover accordingly.
I'm sorry, just from a legislative point of view,
and you, you've heard from the previous submitters
who really know a great deal more about this than me.
This is not the sort of drafting
we should be putting on the statute book.
If you want clarity for commercial certainty,
I just follow up one other question.
Yeah. At what, at what point does, uh, do you get
to the place where the institution, the banking institution,
insurance institution, is actually making,
effectively making the decision
and forcing the result rather than it being a result of a,
an environmental situation?
For the, the one I particularly note was around, uh,
the concerns of the Motor Trades Association,
where they're saying that some
of them are being told they
are not gonna be able to get finance.
In fact, they're having their finance withdrawn, um,
over the, the next five years, 2 20 30.
That will be the financial institutions causing the,
the collapse of a particular industry with that
to be followed through rather than any particular, um, real,
um, external environmental, um, or financial situation.
Well, in, in that case, I suspect that what, what,
what financial institutions are looking at is not
so much environmental risk,
but the fact that there are technological risks.
Mm-hmm. And you have to, if you, if you're,
if you're in the business of lending to people
who are in the business of Fossil, uh, uh, uh,
combustion engines, how long are they gonna be in business?
How, how much capital are you gonna tie up there?
When if a switch to electric vehicles means
that a certain type of technology
and the skills associated with it
and the capital that's invested is gonna be less used at a
certain point, you've gotta make a commercial risk judgment
there, but to be told by a bill, oh,
you can't think about that.
Oh no. You might say, well, no,
the wording can can't allow that.
But you said that would, but, but yeah. Yeah.
So, so essentially the disagreement between us is
that you are using very, very broad language
and then saying, let's see where it lands.
Let's see where it lands. Which is a, I think a,
a legally very uncertain way to do things.
I think you'd need to tighten this up very,
very significantly, which then brings you back into a world
where governments say, we've decided this technology is no
longer going to be around and that one isn't.
Governments can't determine those things. Markets do.
And lenders have to look at where markets are going.
And some of them will say,
no, we'll hang in there for longer.
We think there's some business to be made here.
He's gonna stay in business longer than longer than
that institution thinks.
This is a commercial decision.
You don't need a statute, uh, to start trying
to help make those decisions for them.
Okay. I will leave That one there because
We'll leave that one there and,
and perhaps his worship could take
the, the right honorable Mr.
Upton out for dinner one night in Wellington
and support the Wellton
economy and work through these issues.
Dunno if, I dunno if you agree on much,
but, uh, thank you so much, commissioner for coming in, uh,
via Zoom and thank you members.
Uh, and that concludes, uh, the hearings, uh, uh, for today.
Uh, we'll have some next week.
Thank you to all submitters
and we will, um, uh, we will look forward to going
to the house for question time at two o'clock.
Thank you.